Proceedings of Machine Learning Research 230:1–34, 2024 Conformal and Probabilistic Prediction with Applications




  Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise
                       exchangeability
Derck W. E. Prinzhorn∗                                             derck.prinzhorn@student.uva.nl
Thijmen Nijdam∗                                                      thijmen.nijdam@student.uva.nl
Putri A. van der Linden                                                       p.a.vanderlinden@uva.nl
Alexander Timans                                                                        a.r.timans@uva.nl
University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands


Editor: Simone Vantini, Matteo Fontana, Aldo Solari, Henrik Boström and Lars Carlsson


                                                 Abstract
       Conformal prediction offers a practical framework for distribution-free uncertainty quan-
       tification, providing finite-sample coverage guarantees under relatively mild assumptions
       on data exchangeability. However, these assumptions cease to hold for time series due
       to their temporally correlated nature. In this work, we present a novel use of conformal
       prediction for time series forecasting that incorporates time series decomposition. This
       approach allows us to model different temporal components individually. By applying spe-
       cific conformal algorithms to each component and then merging the obtained prediction
       intervals, we customize our methods to account for the different exchangeability regimes
       underlying each component. Our decomposition-based approach is thoroughly discussed
       and empirically evaluated on synthetic and real-world data. We find that the method pro-
       vides promising results on well-structured time series, but can be limited by factors such
       as the decomposition step for more complex data.
       Keywords: Conformal prediction, time series decomposition, exchangeability regimes


1. Introduction
Time series forecasting is a central task that sees widespread occurrence in various sectors
such as finance, business, energy, or weather (Sezer et al., 2020; Deb et al., 2017; Lim and
Zohren, 2021), and decision-makers value the ability to quantify the uncertainty associated
with a given forecast (Makridakis and Bakas, 2016; Padilla et al., 2021). Conformal predic-
tion (CP) has emerged as a popular method for such uncertainty quantification, providing
distribution-free, finite-sample coverage guarantees under assumptions on data exchange-
ability (Shafer and Vovk, 2008; Vovk et al., 2005). However, data modalities such as time
series are generally non-exchangeable due to their sequentially correlated nature, render-
ing applications of CP challenging. Recent CP approaches catered to non-exchangeable
data such as Barber et al. (2023), Xu and Xie (2021) or Gibbs and Candès (2021) relax
these exchangeability assumptions through weighting strategies emphasizing sample con-
tributions, or rely on alternate assumptions altogether. These methods, however, always
operate directly on the original time series.
    Alternatively, temporal signals can be represented through a set of components that
reflect varying informative temporal patterns, obtained via a time series decomposition
  ∗
      Equal contributions. Correspondence to <derck.prinzhorn@student.uva.nl>.


© 2024 D.W.E. Prinzhorn, T. Nijdam, P.A. van der Linden & A. Timans.
                       Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Figure 1: A high-level overview of our conformal time series decomposition approach. A
time series signal is decomposed into individual components, and each component is asso-
ciated with a specific regime of exchangeability (none, local or global). Relevant conformal
methods are applied to each component, producing intermediate prediction intervals which
are then recomposed to obtain a prediction interval for the overall time series.


(TSD, Hyndman and Athanasopoulos (2018)). Such a decomposition provides a flexible way
of capturing and analysing temporal correlations at different scales, and has been employed
to improve forecasting quality or identify outliers (Theodosiou, 2011; Wen et al., 2019).
Interestingly, the interplay between possible decomposition models and CP approaches for
time series remains unexplored.
    In our work, we investigate this connection by leveraging TSD principles for conformal
time series forecasting (see Fig. 1). Our approach decomposes the time series and relates
each extracted component to a specific underlying exchangeability regime, which guides the
application of tailored CP methods per component. Obtained component-wise prediction
intervals (PIs) are then recomposed to obtain aggregated intervals for the overall time
series. We validate our methods on both synthetic and real-world data, showing promising
results when exchangeability assumptions seem satisfied. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to thoroughly explore the intersection of conformal methods and time series
decomposition. In summary, our key contributions include:

   • a proposed pipeline for conformal time series forecasting via time series decomposition,
     with several crucial design choices outlined and motivated; and

   • conceptually relating temporal dependencies underlying each time series component
     to different notions of exchangeability, including novel weighting strategies for the
     seasonal time series component which are framed in terms of local exchangeability.


2. Background: time series decomposition and exchangeability regimes
We begin by introducing notation for our time series and conformal prediction settings. We
next provide general background on time series decomposition, and follow with details on
selected CP methods for identified regimes of data exchangeability relevant to our approach.

                                             2
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Time series data. We define a time series of length T as a sequence of sampled covariate-
response pairs D = {(xt , yt )}Tt=1 ⊆ X × Y from PXY . We denote feature and target spaces
X ⊆ Rd and Y ⊆ R, since we consider a univariate time series (as opposed to multivariate
responses). Observed pairs are split into three disjoint sets: a training set Dtrain , calibration
set Dcal = {(xi , yi )}ni=1 and test set Dtest = {(xj , yj )}nj=n+1
                                                               t
                                                                    . Dtrain is used to fit a prediction
        ˆ
model fθ : X → Y, Dcal is leveraged for any conformal procedure, and we evaluate on Dtest .
Conformal prediction. In order to build coverage-controlling prediction sets, we first
define a scoring function s : X × Y → R applied to Dcal , resulting in a set of nonconformity
scores S = {s(fˆθ (Xi ), Yi )}ni=1 = {si }ni=1 1 . These encode a desired notion of dissimilarity
                                   △


(i.e., nonconformity) between predictions and responses, such as the plain residual |fˆθ (Xi )−
Yi |. The scores are leveraged to compute a conformal quantile Q̂(1 − α; F̂ (S)), where F̂ (S)
denotes the empirical c.d.f. of the score set S ∪ {+∞}2 . The target coverage level (1 − α)
is defined for a tolerated miscoverage rate α ∈ (0, 1). For a new test sample (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ),
a valid prediction set for Xn+1 is then constructed as Ĉ(Xn+1 ) = {y ∈ Y : s(fˆ(Xn+1 ), y) ≤
Q̂(1 − α; F̂ (S))}. Assuming data exchangeability holds, the set Ĉ(Xn+1 ) then guarantees
the desired marginal coverage, i.e., we have that PDcal ,Dtest ∼PXY (Yn+1 ∈ Ĉ(Xn+1 )) ≥ 1 − α.
For our regression setting, the sets Ĉ(Xn+1 ) ⊆ R take the form of prediction intervals (PIs).

2.1. Time series decomposition
Time series decomposition (TSD) involves the analysis of a time series by decomposing it
into several components, each representing distinct time-dependent patterns across varying
durations. Methods for TSD can vary in the type of time-dependent patterns they ex-
tract (e.g., components in target or frequency domains), and how these are combined (e.g.,
explicitly or implicitly). Most commonly, one assumes some form of explicit decomposi-
tion model with components in target space, i.e., that of the observed responses {yt }Tt=1
(see, e.g., Hyndman and Athanasopoulos (2018)). These components typically include a
long-term trend, reflecting the overarching direction of the series over extended periods; a
seasonal component, capturing recurrent patterns within a specific cycle, such as yearly or
quarterly variations; and a noise term or remainder component, accounting for fluctuations,
irregularities and randomness not explained by the trend or seasonal influences.
    Specifically, let Yt denote the random variable of the response at time t. Then, a TSD
into trend T , seasonality S and remainder component R can be modelled as

                                          Yt = Tt ◦ St ◦ Rt ,                                       (1)

where ◦ is a binary operator, often chosen to be either addition (+) or multiplication (×).
Generally, an additive model is suitable when the time series is relatively stable and exhibits
low volatility, while a multiplicative structure is useful when there is strong proportionality
of components to the level of the time series, i.e., a dependency on the magnitude of the data
(Hyndman and Athanasopoulos, 2018). Alternatively, data transformations such as into log-
space or via Box-Cox power transforms (Osborne, 2010) may alleviate such dependencies
and permit the use of additive models nonetheless.
1. Random variables are denoted upper-case (X) and their observed realizations as lower-case (x).
2. The inclusion of {+∞} is a notational formality, see, e.g., Barber et al. (2023).


                                                   3
                       Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Various methods exist for estimating T , S and R. Classical decomposition approaches
following Macaulay (1931) involve isolating the trend through a smoothing mechanism, such
as a weighted moving average. The estimated trend can in turn be used to extract seasonal
patterns by de-trending the time series and averaging over seasonal instances, where the
cycle frequency (e.g., yearly, monthly or daily) is pre-specified. Finally, the remainder is
defined as the portion of the signal that is not explained by either component. This general
framework has been extended and improved upon by a range of TSD methods which vary
in expressivity, assumptions and use-cases (see § 4).
    A popular approach is Seasonal-Trend decomposition based on LOESS (STL) introduced
by Cleveland et al. (1990), which leverages local weighted polynomial regression for the
decomposition (see Cleveland and Devlin (1988) for details). STL continues to see use in
recent applications due to favourable properties such as its non-parametric formulation,
ability to handle varying cycle frequencies of unconstrained form, and outlier robustness
due to its weighting mechanism (Hyndman and Athanasopoulos, 2018; Theodosiou, 2011).
It is thus also our employed decomposition method throughout the experiments (§ 5).
    Regardless of a particular choice, TSD methods remain constrained by the inherent
limitations of an attempted decomposition, which assumes clear underlying patterns and is
susceptible to real-world data irregularities, adversely affecting any decomposition results.
Such irregularities can include data outliers, fluctuating seasonal patterns, complex system-
atic interactions (e.g., irregular trend behaviour), or inherently low signal-to-noise ratios
(Wen et al., 2019). While expectations on a proper decomposition for ‘well-behaved’ time
series may be warranted, e.g., by arguments such as Wold’s decomposition (Miamee and
Pourahmadi, 1988), retrieving interpretable components remains challenging in practice.

2.2. Conformal methods for different exchangeability regimes
Conformal prediction methods were first proposed assuming global exchangeability, i.e.,
data exchangeability across all samples (Vovk et al., 2005). We define data exchangeability
similar to Shafer and Vovk (2008) as follows:

Definition 1 (Exchangeability) A sequence of random variables X1 , . . . , Xn is exchange-
able if for any permutation π : {1, . . . , n} → {1, . . . , n} with n ≥ 1 we have that

                           P (X1 , . . . , Xn ) = P (Xπ(1) , . . . , Xπ(n) ).

That is, the joint distribution of X1 , . . . , Xn remains invariant to any permutation of in-
dices. Notably, the setting of i.i.d random variables is a special case thereof. Relaxing this
assumption to weaker notions of exchangeability has proven fruitful and permitted broad-
ening the application of CP methods to settings with (temporally) dependent data (see § 4),
for which Definition 1 is violated.
    Relevant to our problem setting, we identify three distinct notions of exchangeability of
varying assumption strength: (i) the strongest condition of global exchangeability; (ii) a
total lack of exchangeability, instead relying on alternate assumptions; and (iii) in-between
forms of local exchangeability based on weighted CP. We next describe selected CP methods
for each of these three exchangeability regimes in more detail, which are subsequently
leveraged for our TSD approach in § 3.

                                                   4
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Global exchangeability. The well-known standard split CP (Papadopoulos et al., 2007)
belongs to this case. Herein, the set of nonconformity scores S is obtained from a single-split
calibration set to compute the conformal quantile Q̂(1 − α; F̂ (S)). To alleviate dependency
on the single split and improve adaptivity, principles from cross-validation can be employed
(Kim et al., 2020; Vovk, 2015). Specifically, Barber et al. (2021) propose the jackknife+ as
a per-sample, and CV+ as a per-fold leave-one-out approach. The joint set Dtrain ∪ Dcal
is split into K distinct folds and predictors fˆθ,−k are fitted with the k-th fold removed,
which in turn acts as an unbiased set to compute out-of-fold nonconformity scores. For
any new test sample (Xn+1 , Yn+1 ), both split and cross-conformal approaches assume data
exchangeability of Dcal ∪ {(Xn+1 , Yn+1 )} for coverage guarantees to hold.

Lack of exchangeability. In the presence of temporal dependency between samples,
proposed CP methods employ update strategies to achieve target coverage over time under
alternate assumptions (see § 3.2), and provided guarantees do not require data exchangeabil-
ity. Ensemble batch prediction intervals (EnbPI, Xu and Xie (2021)), a popular method,
makes use of repeated updates to the calibration set. An ensemble of bootstrapped es-
timators is used to obtain a score set St of leave-one-out nonconformity scores, up to
some timestep t. A prediction interval Ĉ(Xt+1 ) for t + 1 then uses a time-dependent
quantile Q̂t+1 (1 − α; F̂ (St )), where St is updated in a rolling fashion for the next step as
St+1 := (St \{s1 }) ∪ {st+1 }. Adaptive conformal inference (ACI, Gibbs and Candès (2021)),
another popular approach, proposes quantile updating on the basis of previously observed
coverage. That is, given the current timestep t, PIs for t + 1 utilize a time-dependent quan-
tile Q̂t+1 (1 − αt+1 ; F̂ (St )), where the target coverage level αt+1 is affected by (mis-)coverage
at the previous step via the update αt+1 = αt + γ (α − 1[Yt ∈       / Ĉ(Xt )]), with step size γ > 0.

Local exchangeability. A number of CP approaches operate in-between the two men-
tioned regimes. These primarily leverage weighting mechanisms to assign varying measures
of importance to individual scores, where such importance may relate to sample distances
in time, feature space, distribution, and others (see § 4). A general formulation of weighted
CP is given by computing a conformal quantile Q̂(1 − α; F̂w (S)), where F̂w (S) is now the
empirical c.d.f. over a weighted score set and takes the form
                                             n
                                             X
                                 F̂w (S) =         w̃i δsi + w̃n+1 δ+∞ ,                          (2)
                                             i=1

with δsi denoting P the dirac delta centered at score si , and w̃i its associated normalized
weight such that ni=1 w̃i = 1. Barber et al. (2023) suggest fixed weights which aim to
minimize the total variational distance, e.g., by upweighting more recent samples in case
of distribution shifts; whereas Guan (2023) employ data-dependent weights determined by
feature distance via a ‘localizer’ function, such as the kernel distance exp{−h |Xi − Xn+1 |}.
    Interestingly, a relationship between particular weighting schemes and exchangeability
assumptions can be established. For instance, it is straightforward to see that Eq. 2 with the
choice w̃i = 1/(n + 1) ∀i = 1, . . . , n recovers standard split CP, and thus subsumes global
exchangeability for coverage guarantees to hold. We hypothesize that similar relations can
be established for locally restricted (approximate) data exchangeability, as illustrated in
§ 3.3. We suggest defining such local exchangeability similarly to Definition 1 as below:

                                                     5
                          Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Definition 2 (Local exchangeability) Consider a sequence of random variables X1 , . . . , Xn
and denote its index set by I := {1, . . . , n}. For any subset I ′ := {1, . . . , k} ⊂ I the as-
sociated random variables X1 , . . . , Xk are locally (approximately) exchangeable if for any
permutation π̃ : I ′ → I ′ with |I ′ | ≥ 1 we have that P (X1 , . . . , Xk ) ≃ P (Xπ̃(1) , . . . , Xπ̃(k) ).


3. Leveraging exchangeability regimes for time series components
We now explicitly match CP methods for varying regimes of exchangeability to time series
components obtained from its decomposition. Our key insight is the correspondence between
obtained components and their potential to fulfill respective exchangeability assumptions,
permitting the application of tailored CP algorithms to each component. While the corre-
spondence is straightforward for remainder and trend terms, we explore different weighting
mechanisms for the seasonal term, and relate them to notions of local exchangeability by
Definition 2. Our exchangeability hypotheses are empirically challenged in § 5.

3.1. Remainder component: globally exchangeable
The remainder component R (Eq. 1) accounts for fluctuations that are left unexplained by
other components. Also referred to as error or noise ϵ, this term is frequently paired with a
systematic component fθ (X) in many statistical models, typically via the additive structure
fθ (X) + ϵ. Additional assumptions may be placed on ϵ, such as on i.i.d sample draws or its
distribution origin (e.g., the common assumption ϵ ∼ N (0, σ 2 )). These conditions apply to
a broad spectrum of (non-)parametric models, including linear regression, generalized linear
models, regression splines, ARIMA, and more (see, e.g., Hastie et al. (2009)). Similarly,
STL and its regression mechanism are based on a linear additive structure, but do not
impose any distributional form (Cleveland et al., 1990).
     Aligned with these common assumptions, we hypothesize R to satisfy a lenient i.i.d
condition. If the signal is perfectly decomposed according to Eq. 1, the remainder term will
ideally reflect uncorrelated functional randomness only – what is referred to as ‘white noise’
in time series modelling (Parzen, 1966). While practicly unattainable due to approximation
errors, one can nonetheless expect an accurate TSD to capture a large part of the non-
exchangeable time series signal, thereby justifying a relaxed i.i.d assumption on R via
global exchangeability. This permits the use of CP methods requiring such a condition,
including standard split CP and its cross-validation variants. Specifically, we consider the
CV+ algorithm by Barber et al. (2021), which minimizes dependency on a single calibration
split and is observed to yield smaller prediction intervals than split CP. On the other hand,
its finite-sample, distribution-free coverage guarantee is limited to (1 − 2α), similar to other
cross-conformal approaches (Vovk, 2015). In practice, empirical coverage tends to satisfy
(1 − α) and above, as noted by Barber et al. (2021) and corroborated in our experiments.

3.2. Trend component: non-exchangeable
The trend reflects long-term temporal patterns in the time series, and captures the strongest
proportion of temporally correlated signal in the data. As such, observed trend values
{Tt }Tt=1 exhibit strong serial correlation, and any permutation risks modifying their joint
distribution, thus violating Definition 1. In such settings, one may directly leverage any

                                                   6
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




proposed CP methods designed for non-exchangeable time series, relying on the relationship
between a time series and its extracted trend. This strong correspondence is evident, for
example, in the common practice of detrending, a preprocessing step used to achieve data
stationarity (Wu et al., 2007).
    In our experiments, we rely on the two popular CP approaches EnbPI (Xu and Xie,
2021) and ACI (Gibbs and Candès, 2021), which we briefly outlined in § 2.2. Since data
exchangeability is considered violated, these methods rely on alternate assumptions to derive
nominal coverage guarantees. EnbPI assumes a linear model structure Yt = fθ (Xt ) + ϵt ,
and a stationary and strongly mixing error process {ϵt }Tt=1 3 . Under such conditions, a lower
bound on the procedure’s under-coverage is derived in finite samples (Xu and Xie (2021),
Thm. 1), and for t → ∞ asymptotically attains marginal coverage (1 − α). ACI does
not require additional assumptions beyond conditions on the step size γ to provide bounds
on the miscoverage rate (Gibbs and Candès (2021), Prop. 4.1), which likewise recovers
asymptotic marginal coverage at level (1 − α). In both instances, we generally find that
empirical coverage is achieved in finite samples. We refer to their respective works for
further details.

3.3. Seasonal component: locally exchangeable
The seasonal component S is designed to capture regular patterns in time series, specifically
periodically recurring variations like weekly or daily peaks. Although extracted patterns
are time-dependent, their repetitive nature implies that such dependency might be confined
to shorter time intervals. Specifically, for a consistent periodic schedule, strong temporal
correlation is confined to samples within a single period (e.g., from one trough to the
next), leading us to hypothesize that samples across periods can be considered locally
(approximately) exchangeable. For example, permuting the indices of samples at the period
peaks or troughs is likely to have minimal impact on the overall pattern. In practice, we
may test such local exchangeability by means of weighted CP according to Eq. 2, with
particular weights w̃ reflecting different exchangeability conditions. We follow by detailing
three such weighting schemes, qualitatively illustrated in Fig. 2.
Weighting strategies. Consider a seasonal pat-
tern with fixed period length τ > 0. In addition, let
us denote by τn+1 the position of a given test sample
with respect to its period start. For example, if we
consider the sample to be located at the season peak
in Fig. 2, then τn+1 = 4 for the given period length
τ = 7 (equating the particular time step). Next, let
Ical := {1, . . . , n} denote the index set of Dcal . Our           Figure 2: Illustration of weight-
first approach BinaryPoint subsets Ical based on                    ing schemes for an exemplary
the test sample’s precise period location to obtain a               season (grey) with period τ = 7.
binary weighting mechanism. That is, the filtered                   The test sample’s location is at
            BP ⊂ I
index set Ical                                                      the period peak, thus τn+1 = 4.
                       cal takes the form

                                 BP
                                Ical := {i ∈ Ical : i mod τ = τn+1 }.                              (3)
3. The i.i.d setting can be highlighted as a special mixing case.


                                                     7
                          Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




The employed weighting mechanism for Eq. 2 is then given by w̃i = 1/(|Ical    BP | + 1) · 1[i ∈
  BP
Ical ] ∀i = 1, . . . , n, where equal weights are assigned to every sample whose index is in
the filtered set, and zero otherwise4 . Due to the risk of small calibration set sizes, we
further consider an extension mechanism BinaryLocal, wherein BinaryPoint is expanded
to include indices within local neighbourhoods k > 0 of every sample in Ical   BP . In Fig. 2

such a neighbourhood is set to k = 1, i.e., we include samples on either side of τn+1
at the peak. As for BinaryPoint, the samples are weighted equally if included and zero
otherwise, producing a hard binary weighting scheme. As an alternative, we also consider
a softer weighting mechanism ExpLocal, which applies a repeated exponential decay to
all samples in Dcal . Specifically, an unnormalized weight for the i-th calibration sample is
given by the decay λe−λ·∆τi , where λ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the decay rate and ∆τi = |τi − τn+1 |
the sample’s distance in regards to the target location τn+1 for it associated period. Thus
with increasing distance from τn+1 the weights exponentially shrink, as visualised in Fig. 2.
    Since our suggested weighting mechanisms are based on sample distance across time
and assign fixed weights, they primarily relate to schemes discussed in Barber et al. (2023).
Such weights leveraging temporal distance are particularly useful for time series, where
auto-regressive effects are prevalent. Inspired by Guan (2023), we additionally explore
data-dependent weighting based on feature distances in § E.

Relation to local exchangeability. An intuitive connection emerges between the de-
scribed weighting mechanisms and underlying assumptions about local exchangeability fol-
lowing Definition 2. For BinaryPoint (Eq. 3), a highly selective calibration subset is chosen,
and identical weights assume global exchangeability for all included samples. This equates
a strong assumption of local exchangeability confined to a precisely defined calibration set.
The condition is relaxed for BinaryLocal, wherein a larger set size is traded for a more ap-
proximate notion of local exchangeability, especially as the neighborhood expands or when
the period length τ is small. ExpLocal further loosens the assumption by not selectively
filtering calibration samples but rather weighting them based on their distance within peri-
ods. The associated notion of locality depends on factors like period length and decay rate
λ, with the assumption approaching global exchangeability as λ tends towards zero.

3.4. Prediction interval recomposition
After applying selected CP methods to each component of the time series, the component-
level prediction intervals (PIs) must be recomposed to establish final interval boundaries
for the appropriate region in target space Y. The recomposition approach is influenced
by the chosen decomposition structure detailed in Eq. 1, linking directly to the choice of
TSD model. Since we opt for STL, which is based on a linear decomposition, we utilize
an additive structure for recomposition as well. Specifically, the lower and upper interval
bounds for our conformal PI Ĉ(Xn+1 ) = [L̂(Xn+1 ), Û (Xn+1 )] for Yn+1 are computed as

                        L̂(Xn+1 ) = L̂T (Xn+1 ) + L̂S (Xn+1 ) + L̂R (Xn+1 )
                                                                                                        (4)
                       Û (Xn+1 ) = ÛT (Xn+1 ) + ÛS (Xn+1 ) + ÛR (Xn+1 ),

4. Observe that any split of Dcal can be defined as beginning at a seasonal period, which can take different
   shapes as long as the period length is consistent, e.g., trough to trough, peak to peak, etc.


                                                    8
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




where the right-hand side represents the respective component-level bounds for trend T ,
season S and remainder R. In our experiments, this linear recomposition sometimes proved
overly conservative, for example when interactions between components tend towards a mul-
tiplicative nature. To obtain optimally tight PIs, identifying an appropriate recomposition
model is as crucial as an accurate decomposition. In addition, one might consider adjusting
coverage levels or a re-weighting of individual components based on observed PI widths.
For instance, relaxing coverage requirements for components with a small magnitude can
reduce the interval size of the recomposed PI without notably affecting its coverage.

Aggregated coverage guarantee. Different CP methods can be employed across time
series components, which complicates providing a clear statement about the nominal cov-
erage for the recomposed PI detailed in Eq. 4. Under simplified conditions, a loose lower
bound on nominal coverage is obtainable at level 1 − 3α (see § A). In practice, traditional
CP methods offer finite-sample guarantees, contrasting with the asymptotic guarantees
provided by time series approaches. Additionally, any coverage guarantees applicable to
settings of local exchangeability are highly dependent on specific data conditions, which
limits the feasibility of generalizations. For example, the coverage bounds cited in Barber
et al. (2023) are significantly influenced by the total variational distance term, whereas Guan
(2023) highlight the need for careful tuning of the miscoverage rate to avoid overcoverage
in practice. Consequently, deriving an overall coverage guarantee for the recomposed PI,
and its practical applicability, remain open questions. The effectiveness of such guarantees
is likely to be substantially affected by modelling factors such as decomposition quality and
chosen weighting schemes.


4. Related work
Time series decomposition. Building upon classical TSD concepts (Macaulay, 1931),
popular techniques include X-11 (Cleveland and Tiao, 1976), SEATS (Dagum and Bian-
concini, 2016), TBATS (De Livera et al., 2011) and STL (Cleveland et al., 1990). We
refer to Esling and Agon (2012) for an older survey and Mbuli et al. (2020) for a more
recent overview with applications to power systems. In particular, STL sees continued use
in recent works due to its favourable properties over, e.g., X-11 or SEATS (Hyndman and
Athanasopoulos, 2018). This includes domain-specific applications such as traffic, weather
or air quality (Huo et al., 2019; He et al., 2022; Li and Jiang, 2023), as well as extensions
tackling multi-seasonality (Bandara et al., 2021; Trull et al., 2022), robustness (Wen et al.,
2019, 2020), online settings (He et al., 2023; Mishra et al., 2022) or uncertainty (Krake
et al., 2024; Dokumentov and Hyndman, 2022). However, the connection between TSD
models such as STL and CP frameworks remains unexplored. TSD models considering al-
ternative decomposition structures (i.e., not into trend, seasonality and remainder terms)
include theta-differences (Assimakopoulos and Nikolopoulos, 2000), wavelet (Soltani, 2002)
and spectral models (Bonizzi et al., 2014). More recently, implicit decomposition structures
in deep learning-based time series models have been explored, e.g., via self-attention mech-
anisms in transformers (Jiang et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Wu et al.,
2021; Lin et al., 2021). However, retrieved structures are typically fuzzy and sensitive to
model specification; see Wen et al. (2023) for a recent overview.

                                              9
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Conformal prediction for time series. Recent CP approaches for time series typically
employ updating strategies to account for time-dependency of observations. Gibbs and
Candès (2021) fix the calibration set but dynamically adjust the conformal quantile on the
basis of observed coverage. Zaffran et al. (2022) build upon this idea with a more adaptive
weighted quantile, while Angelopoulos et al. (2024) design a quantile tracker borrowing
ideas from control theory. Auer et al. (2023) obtain quantile weights by leveraging the
attention mechanism of a Hopfield Network model. Alternatively, Xu and Xie (2021) select
a fixed quantile and instead periodically update the underlying calibration set. Jensen et al.
(2022) combine this approach with CQR (Romano et al., 2019) for quantile regressors, while
Xu and Xie (2023) replace the fixed quantile with a quantile estimator for more flexibility.
While all the above consider a single time series, CP methods have been also proposed for
the multivariate case. Assuming exchangeability between the observed time series, these
can be used to build individual calibration sets for multiple prediction steps. Stankeviciute
et al. (2021) treat these steps as independent, Sun and Yu (2023) account for dependency
with a copula-based quantile, and Xu et al. (2024) design ellipsoidal sets. Lin et al. (2022)
suggest quantile updates that account for coverage across both time steps and time series.

Local exchangeability. CP methods controlling for global exchangeability violations
(and not specifically designed for time series problems) rely on notions of locally restricted
or weighted exchangeability. In practice, this suggests subsetting or reweighting of cali-
bration samples by some notion of importance. Tibshirani et al. (2019) suggest weights
determined by the likelihood ratio of calibration and test samples to counter covariate
shifts. Applications include Lei and Candès (2021) for counterfactuals, Fannjiang et al.
(2022) for biomolecular design, and Candès et al. (2023) for survival analysis. Podkopaev
and Ramdas (2021) extend ideas to account for potential shifts in target space. Guan (2023)
propose weights determined by kernel distances in feature space, which is leveraged by Hore
and Barber (2023) for improved test-conditional coverage. Gyôrfi and Walk (2019) suggest
a nearest-neighbour reordering of scores based on feature distances, while Amoukou and
Brunel (2023) and Han et al. (2022) reweigh implicitly via density estimates of the em-
pirical c.d.f. F̂ (S). Recently, Barber et al. (2023) suggest fixed weights on the basis of
total variational distances quantifying sequence exchangeability. Conceptually related to
weighted CP are mondrian CP methods, wherein Dcal is partitioned according to different
requirements and exchangeability is assumed to hold within subgroups (Cauchois et al.,
2021; Jung et al., 2023; Toccaceli and Gammerman, 2019).


5. Experiments
We next empirically verify the effectiveness of our TSD approach across a range of time
series datasets. In order to validate our design choices, we first evaluate on a synthetic time
series with known decomposition structure. We then test our approach on three real-world
time series from different domains: San Diego energy consumption 5 , Rossman store sales 6
and Beijing air quality 7 (Zhang et al., 2017). We begin by outlining our experimental setup,

5. https://github.com/pratha19/Hourly_Energy_Consumption_Prediction
6. https://github.com/juniorcl/rossman-store-sales
7. https://github.com/Afkerian/Beijing-Multi-Site-Air-Quality-Data-Data-Set


                                              10
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




which includes employed regression models, CP baselines and evaluation metrics. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/dweprinz/CP-TSD.

Model setup. We consider three different regression models fˆθ for the underlying predic-
tor: a simple linear model, an MLP regressor, and a gradient boosting model. We train the
models in an auto-regressive fashion, i.e., model covariates at time t may include previous
observations yt−k , . . . , yt−1 up to lag order k alongside other available features. In order
to handle extrapolation for non-stationary data, the gradient boosting regressor is trained
on differenced data ∆yt = yt − yt−1 . Such auto-regressive training procedures are in line
with our sequential setup, wherein we simulate receiving a single observation per time step
in a streaming fashion8 . Our regressors are implemented via scikit-learn (Pedregosa
et al., 2011) and minimally tuned (see § G), while employed conformal methods leverage
the library MAPIE (Taquet et al., 2022) when possible.
    Unless stated otherwise, our default target coverage level is fixed at 90% (α = 0.1).
Throughout, we employ STL (Cleveland et al., 1990) for time series decomposition, as
motivated in § 2.1. Our TSD models are compared using the different weighting schemes
described in § 3.3 for the seasonal component, while CP algorithms EnbPI and CV+ are
employed for the trend and remainder terms, respectively. Results on real-world data
in Table 2 are reported for the linear regressor, which proved most robust in terms of
hyperparameter selection. All results are averaged across multiple seeds. Further results
across different combinations of methods and coverage levels can be found in § B and § C.
Predictive model performance as measured via RMSE is reported in § G.

Baselines. We baseline our TSD approaches against CP algorithms EnbPI and ACI in
two ways. Firstly, we consider their direct application to the raw time series signal without
a decomposition (marked as (✗) in results tables below). This baseline aims to quantify
performance differences attributable to the employed TSD model, or an attempted decom-
position in the more general sense. Additionally, we consider their application to each time
series component after applying a TSD model. These decomposition baselines help quan-
tify the efficacy of tailoring CP methods to the exchangeability regimes underlying each
component, as opposed to repeatedly applying the same (non-exchangeable) procedures.

Evaluation metrics. We employ standard metrics to assess the two key desiderata of
validity and efficiency for our conformal approaches. We measure validity via the prediction
interval coverage probability (PICP) – also referred to as empirical coverage – and efficiency
via the prediction interval average width (PIAW). These are defined as

                            tn                                             tn
                         1 X                                            1 X
               PICP =         1[Yj ∈ Ĉ(Xj )]        and     PIAW =          |Ĉ(Xj )|,             (5)
                         nt                                             nt
                            j=1                                            j=1


and metrics are computed equivalently for the overall time series (both in raw and recom-
posed forms) or specific components using respective prediction intervals9 .

8. Our approaches are extendable to batch and online settings, which we do not consider here.
9. By annotating Eq. 5 with component indices T , S or R respectively, which we omit for clarity.


                                                   11
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Figure 3: Qualitative results for a segment of the synthetic time series for the EnbPI
decomposition baseline (left) and our TSD approach with BinaryPoint (right). We observe
more efficient PIs across all time steps, but in particular at seasonal peaks and troughs.

5.1. Synthetic data: time series with known decomposition structure
We first test our model on a synthetic time series that follows a generative process with
known decomposition structure. To this end, we construct a time series with an additive
decomposition (in line with Eq. 1) consisting of the following components:
                                             
                                            t
           Tt = 0.1t, St = 100 · sin 2π ·       , Rt ∼ N (0, 1), t = 1, . . . , T.
                                           30
In this controlled setting we identify the trend as non-exchangeable, the seasonal term as
locally exchangeable, and the remainder as globally exchangeable, thus applying our TSD
approaches leveraging component-specific CP methods.
    Results for different regressors are displayed in Table 1. Firstly, a comparison of base-
lines on the raw and decomposed time series suggest that a TSD approach is meaningful,
since similarly sized PIs are obtained at much higher coverage. Given the observed overcov-
erage tendency, a tuning of nominal coverage levels would permit trading said coverage for
improved interval widths, as suggested in § 3.4. Our TSD approaches with BinaryLocal and
ExpLocal record similar behaviour, but achieve marginally tighter PIs than the decomposi-
tion baselines. Finally, BinaryPoint is able to fully exploit the sinusoidal pattern underlying
the seasonal term, obtaining much-improved intervals over other TSD approaches and base-
lines. That is, the underlying assumption on strong local exchangeability is warranted by
the data’s consistent and accurately retrievable seasonality. This behaviour is highlighted
in Fig. 3, where the largest reductions in PI width are observed at the seasonal extrema.

Table 1: Results on synthetic data for a fixed target coverage of 90% (α = 0.1). Table entries
for our TSD approaches denote different weighting schemes for the seasonal component,
while EnbPI and CV+ are used for trend and remainder. Overall best results are underlined,
while best decomposition results are boldened.

                                       Linear Reg.          MLP Reg.         Gradient Boosting
      Method          Decomposed    P ICP    P IAW (↓)   P ICP   P IAW (↓)   P ICP   P IAW (↓)
 EnbPI                     ✗         0.889    41.694     0.887    41.626     0.897     11.922
 EnbPI                     ✓         0.985    44.013     0.985    44.197     0.987     12.536
 ACI                       ✗         0.898    42.065     0.898    42.168     0.900     11.991
 ACI                       ✓         0.985    43.995     0.986    44.237     0.994    554.298
 BinaryPoint (Ours)        ✓         0.946    29.755     0.947    29.771     0.947     9.524
 BinaryLocal (Ours)        ✓         0.994    41.323     0.994    41.347     0.990     11.942
 ExpLocal (Ours)           ✓         0.994    44.086     0.993    44.009     0.990     12.510


                                              12
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Figure 4: Segments of the three considered real-world time series from multiple domains.
From left to right: Different time series complexities are observed as we consider San Diego
energy consumption with a shifting trend, Rossman store sales with varying seasonali-
ties, and Beijing air quality exhibiting stronger irregularity and noise. The second row
includes prediction intervals leveraging our TSD approaches with the best-performing sea-
sonal weights following Table 2 (left to right: BinaryPoint, ExpLocal, ExpLocal).

5.2. Real-world data

We proceed by evaluating our approach on real-world datasets from different domains, of
which exemplary segments are shown in Fig. 4. Such real-world time series are generally
more volatile and contain less structured regularity. This poses challenges for any TSD
model, in particular regarding retrieved seasonal patterns. While a relatively stable season-
ality is observed for energy consumption, the sales data exhibits more erratic layered seasons,
and the air quality dataset shows no clearly discernible patterns. Thus, the considered time
series exhibit varying levels of complexity affecting both prediction and decomposition qual-
ity, as corroborated by empirical results. Dataset descriptions and detailed result tables for
all three datasets can be found in § B, while qualitative decomposition plots are in § F.


Table 2: Results on real-world data for a fixed target coverage of 90% (α = 0.1) and linear
regressor. Table entries for our TSD approaches denote different weighting schemes for the
seasonal component, while EnbPI and CV+ are used for trend and remainder. Overall best
results are underlined, while best decomposition results are boldened.

                                         Energy                  Sales          Air Quality
      Method          Decomposed    P ICP    P IAW (↓)   P ICP    P IAW (↓)   P ICP   P IAW (↓)
 EnbPI                     ✗         0.907   222.866     0.892     1572.343   0.902    42.918
 EnbPI                     ✓         0.964   243.005      1.0      5303.825   0.954    62.721
 ACI                       ✗         0.901   218.301     0.895     1539.925   0.901    43.549
 ACI                       ✓         0.960   229.425      1.0      5447.390   0.958    63.445
 BinaryPoint (Ours)        ✓         0.971    234.969     1.0      6045.373   0.958    67.014
 BinaryLocal (Ours)        ✓         0.967    240.710     1.0      5426.439   0.955    62.716
 ExpLocal (Ours)           ✓         0.967    240.230     1.0      5248.193   0.954    62.240


                                              13
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Figure 5: A comparison of decomposition baselines EnbPI and ACI and our weighting
mechanisms (§ 3.3) across real-world datasets. Metrics are computed based on obtained
intervals for the seasonal component only. The dashed line marks target coverage of 90%.


Results for all three datasets are summarized in Table 2. Notably, there is a discrepancy
in obtained PI widths between baseline methods applied to the raw and decomposed time
series, particularly evident for the sales data. This strongly relates to the practical limita-
tions of an attempted decomposition, in that inaccurately retrieved components propagate
down-stream and affect the performance of subsequently applied CP algorithms (see also
§ 2.1). For example, STL is only capable of retrieving a single seasonal pattern, whereas
the sales data might exhibit multiple seasonalities at different frequencies. This limitation
also affects the performance of our TSD approaches, preventing them from surpassing time
series-specific CP methods used on the raw signals directly. Among decomposition-based
approaches, however, leveraging exchangeability regimes does appear to enhance perfor-
mance for more complex datasets, with ExpLocal achieving best results on sales and air
quality data. In contrast to synthetic data, the irregular seasonal patterns in real-world
data benefit from softer weighting mechanisms like BinaryLocal and ExpLocal, promoting
associated notions of approximate local exchangeability (Definition 2). Overcoverage ten-
dencies caused by our recomposition model in Eq. 4 could be addressed by dataset-specific
tuning, e.g., on nominal coverage levels. Particularly for more consistent time series such
as energy consumption, such adjustments may help narrow the performance gaps observed.

5.3. Comparison of methods for specific time series components
We now more closely examine and compare parts of our TSD approaches to decomposition
baselines for individual components, particularly focusing on the seasonal and remainder
terms, which are more susceptible to errors (see § G). This analysis allows us to better
understand how assumptions on underlying exchangeability impact the effectiveness of CP
methods we employ on real-world data.
Seasonal component. In Fig. 5, we evaluate our weighting mechanisms – BinaryPoint,
BinaryLocal, and ExpLocal – against non-exchangeable baselines ACI and EnbPI, assessing
the suitability of local exchangeability concepts in handling irregular real-world seasonal pat-
terns. BinaryPoint performs best on energy consumption data, but yields significantly wider

                                              14
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Figure 6: A comparison of decomposition baselines EnbPI and ACI and the CV+ algorithm
(Barber et al., 2021) across real-world datasets. Metrics are computed based on obtained
intervals for the remainder component only. The dashed line marks target coverage of 90%.


PIs for the other datasets, where BinaryLocal and particularly ExpLocal show strong per-
formance. Conversely, EnbPI and ACI generally produce slightly broader PIs but maintain
more consistency across datasets. These findings indicate that the effectiveness of employed
CP methods is indeed highly dependent on a dataset’s ability to meet its exchangeability
assumption. Stronger exchangeability assumptions may benefit datasets with consistent
seasonal patterns, while more approximate notions better suit complex and variable sea-
sonality. However, it remains unclear whether using locally exchangeable CP methods for
seasonal components offers a distinct advantage over generic time series CP methods like
EnbPI, which are less dependent on satisfying such specific assumptions.

Remainder component. As discussed in § 3.1, under an effective TSD model the re-
mainder should ideally resemble uncorrelated ’white noise’. Consequently, we investigate
whether a method like CV+, which assumes global exchangeability, is practically suitable,
or if non-exchangeable approaches that recognize temporal dependencies might be more ap-
propriate. Our results, depicted in Fig. 6, confirm that all CP methods reach the intended
coverage levels and provide similar prediction interval quality, suggesting that global ex-
changeability can indeed be sufficient for modelling the remainder term.


6. Conclusion
In this work, we investigate the use of conformal prediction methods for time series forecast-
ing through the framework of time series decomposition. We examine both conceptually
and empirically the relationship between the components obtained from such a decomposi-
tion, and the applicability of different exchangeability regimes that these components may
adhere to. By leveraging these exchangeability regimes, we apply specific CP algorithms
to each component and combine them to construct prediction intervals that empirically
meet conformal guarantees for the overall time series. Our experiments on both synthetic
and real-world data indicate that while promising, the effectiveness of obtained uncertainty
estimates largely depends on the complexity of the time series, the quality of the decomposi-

                                             15
                       Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




tion, and other methodological choices. Consequently, our approaches appear most effective
for ‘well-behaved’ time series that exhibit high regularity, or when prior knowledge about
the data is available to guide modelling decisions. In such settings, closely aligning the
employed CP methods with specific exchangeability regimes can be highly beneficial.
    Currently, our exploratory investigation focused on an additive decomposition model
using the STL algorithm. Future work should address the robustness of our results by (i)
evaluating more advanced time series decomposition algorithms such as MSTL (Bandara
et al., 2021), RobustSTL (Wen et al., 2019), or OnlineSTL (Mishra et al., 2022), which may
offer more flexible modelling capabilities; (ii) considering different de- and recomposition
models, such as for multiplicative structures; and (iii) exploring more advanced seasonality
weighting schemes, such as adaptive weights that respond to component behaviour, or draw
inspiration from local exchangeability conditions seen in mondrian CP methods (Toccaceli
and Gammerman, 2019). Additionally, open questions remain related to nominal coverage
guarantees, and quantifying the impact of decomposition quality on such guarantees.
    By illustrating the potential synergies between conformal prediction and classical time
series decomposition, we hope to encourage further research at their intersection, highlight-
ing the critical role of thoughtfully assessing underlying exchangeability assumptions.




                                             16
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




References
Salim Amoukou and Nicolas Brunel. Adaptive conformal prediction by reweighting non-
  conformity score. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.12695, 2023.

Anastasios Angelopoulos, Emmanuel Candès, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Conformal PID con-
 trol for time series prediction. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2024.

Vassilis Assimakopoulos and Konstantinos Nikolopoulos. The Theta model: A decomposi-
  tion approach to forecasting. International Journal of Forecasting, 2000.

Andreas Auer, Martin Gauch, Daniel Klotz, and Sepp Hochreiter. Conformal prediction for
 time series with Modern Hopfield Networks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
 Systems, 2023.

Kasun Bandara, Rob J Hyndman, and Christoph Bergmeir. MSTL: A seasonal-trend decom-
 position algorithm for time series with multiple seasonal patterns. International Journal
 of Operational Research, 2021.

Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candès, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Pre-
  dictive inference with the jackknife+. The Annals of Statistics, 2021.

Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel J Candès, Aaditya Ramdas, and Ryan J Tibshirani. Con-
  formal prediction beyond exchangeability. The Annals of Statistics, 2023.

Stephen Bates, Emmanuel Candès, Lihua Lei, Yaniv Romano, and Matteo Sesia. Testing
  for Outliers with Conformal p-values. The Annals of Statistics, 2023.

Pietro Bonizzi, Joël MH Karel, Olivier Meste, and Ralf LM Peeters. Singular spectrum
  decomposition: A new method for time series decomposition. Advances in Adaptive Data
  Analysis, 2014.

Emmanuel Candès, Lihua Lei, and Zhimei Ren. Conformalized survival analysis. Journal
 of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology, 2023.

Maxime Cauchois, Suyash Gupta, and John C Duchi. Knowing what you know: Valid and
 validated confidence sets in multiclass and multilabel prediction. Journal of Machine
 Learning Research, 2021.

Robert B Cleveland, William S Cleveland, Jean E McRae, and Irma Terpenning. STL: A
  seasonal-trend decomposition. Journal of Official Statistics, 1990.

William P Cleveland and George C Tiao. Decomposition of seasonal time series: A model
 for the census X-11 program. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1976.

William S Cleveland and Susan J Devlin. Locally weighted regression: An approach to
 regression analysis by local fitting. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 1988.

Estela Bee Dagum and Silvia Bianconcini. Seasonal adjustment methods and real time
  trend-cycle estimation. Springer, 2016.

                                             17
                       Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Alysha M De Livera, Rob J Hyndman, and Ralph D Snyder. Forecasting time series with
  complex seasonal patterns using exponential smoothing. Journal of the American Statis-
  tical Association, 2011.

Chirag Deb, Fan Zhang, Junjing Yang, Siew Eang Lee, and Kwok Wei Shah. A review
 on time series forecasting techniques for building energy consumption. Renewable and
 Sustainable Energy Reviews, 2017.

Alexander Dokumentov and Rob J Hyndman. STR: Seasonal-trend decomposition using
  regression. INFORMS Journal on Data Science, 2022.

Philippe Esling and Carlos Agon. Time-series data mining. ACM Computing Surveys
  (CSUR), 2012.

Clara Fannjiang, Stephen Bates, Anastasios N Angelopoulos, Jennifer Listgarten, and
  Michael I Jordan. Conformal prediction under feedback covariate shift for biomolecu-
  lar design. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 2022.

Isaac Gibbs and Emmanuel Candès. Adaptive conformal inference under distribution shift.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Leying Guan. Localized conformal prediction: A generalized inference framework for con-
  formal prediction. Biometrika, 2023.

Laszlo Gyôrfi and Harro Walk. Nearest neighbor based conformal prediction. Annales de
  l’ISUP, 2019.

Xing Han, Ziyang Tang, Joydeep Ghosh, and Qiang Liu. Split localized conformal predic-
  tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.13092, 2022.

Trevor Hastie, Robert Tibshirani, Jerome H Friedman, and Jerome H Friedman. The
  elements of statistical learning: Data mining, inference, and prediction. Springer, 2009.

Renfei He, Limao Zhang, and Alvin Wei Ze Chew. Modeling and predicting rainfall time se-
  ries using seasonal-trend decomposition and machine learning. Knowledge-Based Systems,
  2022.

Xiao He, Ye Li, Jian Tan, Bin Wu, and Feifei Li. OneShotSTL: One-Shot seasonal-trend
  decomposition for online time series anomaly detection and forecasting. Proceedings of
  the VLDB Endowment, 2023.

Rohan Hore and Rina Foygel Barber. Conformal prediction with local weights: Random-
  ization enables local guarantees. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.07850, 2023.

Yonghua Huo, Yu Yan, Dan Du, Zhihao Wang, Yixin Zhang, and Yang Yang. Long-term
  span traffic prediction model based on STL decomposition and LSTM. Asia-Pacific
  Network Operations and Management Symposium (APNOMS), 2019.

Rob J Hyndman and George Athanasopoulos. Forecasting: Principles and Practice. OTexts,
  2018.

                                            18
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Vilde Jensen, Filippo Maria Bianchi, and Stian Normann Anfinsen. Ensemble conformalized
  quantile regression for probabilistic time series forecasting. IEEE Transactions on Neural
  Networks and Learning Systems, 2022.

Song Jiang, Tahin Syed, Xuan Zhu, Joshua Levy, Boris Aronchik, and Yizhou Sun. Bridging
  self-attention and time series decomposition for periodic forecasting. ACM International
  Conference on Information & Knowledge Management, 2022.

Christopher Jung, Georgy Noarov, Ramya Ramalingam, and Aaron Roth. Batch multivalid
 conformal prediction. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.

Byol Kim, Chen Xu, and Rina Barber. Predictive inference is free with the Jackknife+-
  after-bootstrap. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2020.

Tim Krake, Daniel Klötzl, David Hägele, and Daniel Weiskopf. Uncertainty-aware seasonal-
  trend decomposition based on Loess. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
  Graphics, 2024.

Lihua Lei and Emmanuel J Candès. Conformal inference of counterfactuals and individual
  treatment effects. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodol-
  ogy, 2021.

Wenlin Li and Xuchu Jiang. Prediction of air pollutant concentrations based on TCN-
 BiLSTM-DMAttention with STL decomposition. Scientific Reports, 2023.

Bryan Lim and Stefan Zohren. Time-series forecasting with deep learning: A survey. Philo-
  sophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, 2021.

Yang Lin, Irena Koprinska, and Mashud Rana. SSDNet: State space decomposition neural
  network for time series forecasting. IEEE International Conference on Data Mining,
  2021.

Zhen Lin, Shubhendu Trivedi, and Jimeng Sun. Conformal prediction with temporal quan-
  tile adjustments. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Frederick R Macaulay. The smoothing of time series. National Bureau of Economic Research
  New York, 1931.

Spyros Makridakis and Nikolas Bakas. Forecasting and uncertainty: A survey. Risk and
  Decision Analysis, 2016.

Nhlanhla Mbuli, Malusi Mathonsi, Modisane Seitshiro, and Jan-Harm C Pretorius. Decom-
 position forecasting methods: A review of applications in power systems. Energy Reports,
 2020.

AG Miamee and M Pourahmadi. Wold decomposition, prediction and parameterization of
 stationary processes with infinite variance. Probability Theory and Related Fields, 1988.

Abhinav Mishra, Ram Sriharsha, and Sichen Zhong. OnlineSTL: Scaling time series de-
 composition by 100x. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 2022.

                                             19
                      Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Jason Osborne. Improving your data transformations: Applying the Box-Cox transforma-
  tion. Practical Assessment, Research, and Evaluation, 2010.
Lace MK Padilla, Maia Powell, Matthew Kay, and Jessica Hullman. Uncertain about
  uncertainty: How qualitative expressions of forecaster confidence impact decision-making
  with uncertainty visualizations. Frontiers in Psychology, 2021.
Harris Papadopoulos, Volodya Vovk, and Alex Gammerman. Conformal prediction with
 Neural Networks. IEEE International Conference on Tools with Artificial Intelligence
 (ICTAI), 2007.
Emanuel Parzen. Time series analysis for models of signal plus white noise. Department
 of Statistics, Stanford University, 1966.
Fabian Pedregosa, Gaël Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand
  Thirion, Olivier Grisel, Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent
  Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python. the Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2011.
Aleksandr Podkopaev and Aaditya Ramdas. Distribution-free uncertainty quantification
  for classification under label shift. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, 2021.
Yaniv Romano, Evan Patterson, and Emmanuel Candès. Conformalized quantile regression.
  Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
Omer Berat Sezer, Mehmet Ugur Gudelek, and Ahmet Murat Ozbayoglu. Financial time
 series forecasting with deep learning: A systematic literature review 2005–2019. Applied
 Soft Computing, 2020.
Glenn Shafer and Vladimir Vovk. A tutorial on conformal prediction. Journal of Machine
  Learning Research, 2008.
Skander Soltani. On the use of the wavelet decomposition for time series prediction. Neu-
  rocomputing, 2002.
Kamile Stankeviciute, Ahmed M Alaa, and Mihaela van der Schaar. Conformal time-series
 forecasting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021.
Sophia Huiwen Sun and Rose Yu. Copula conformal prediction for multi-step time series
  prediction. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
Vianney Taquet, Vincent Blot, Thomas Morzadec, Louis Lacombe, and Nicolas Brunel.
  MAPIE: An open-source library for distribution-free uncertainty quantification. arXiv
  preprint arXiv:2207.12274, 2022.
Marina Theodosiou. Forecasting monthly and quarterly time series using STL decomposi-
 tion. International Journal of Forecasting, 2011.
Ryan J Tibshirani, Rina Foygel Barber, Emmanuel Candès, and Aaditya Ramdas. Confor-
  mal prediction under covariate shift. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
  2019.

                                           20
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Alexander Timans, Christoph-Nikolas Straehle, Kaspar Sakmann, and Eric Nalisnick. A
  powerful rank-based correction to multiple testing under positive dependency. arXiv
  Preprint (arXiv:2311.10900), 2023.

Paolo Toccaceli and Alexander Gammerman. Combination of inductive mondrian conformal
  predictors. Machine Learning, 2019.

Oscar Trull, J Carlos Garcı́a-Dı́az, and Angel Peiró-Signes. Multiple seasonal STL decompo-
  sition with discrete-interval moving seasonalities. Applied Mathematics and Computation,
  2022.

Vladimir Vovk. Cross-conformal predictors. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial Intelli-
  gence, 2015.

Vladimir Vovk, Alexander Gammerman, and Glenn Shafer. Algorithmic learning in a ran-
  dom world. Springer, 2005.

Zhiyuan Wang, Xovee Xu, Weifeng Zhang, Goce Trajcevski, Ting Zhong, and Fan Zhou.
  Learning latent seasonal-trend representations for time series forecasting. Advances in
  Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.

Qingsong Wen, Jingkun Gao, Xiaomin Song, Liang Sun, Huan Xu, and Shenghuo Zhu.
  RobustSTL: A robust seasonal-trend decomposition algorithm for long time series. AAAI
  Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2019.

Qingsong Wen, Zhe Zhang, Yan Li, and Liang Sun. Fast RobustSTL: Efficient and robust
  seasonal-trend decomposition for time series with complex patterns. ACM SIGKDD
  International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining, 2020.

Qingsong Wen, Tian Zhou, Chaoli Zhang, Weiqi Chen, Ziqing Ma, Junchi Yan, and Liang
  Sun. Transformers in time series: A survey. International Joint Conference on Artificial
  Intelligence, 2023.

Haixu Wu, Jiehui Xu, Jianmin Wang, and Mingsheng Long. Autoformer: Decomposition
 transformers with auto-correlation for long-term series forecasting. Advances in Neural
 Information Processing Systems, 2021.

Zhaohua Wu, Norden E Huang, Steven R Long, and Chung-Kang Peng. On the trend,
  detrending, and variability of nonlinear and nonstationary time series. Proceedings of the
  National Academy of Sciences, 2007.

Chen Xu and Yao Xie. Conformal prediction interval for dynamic time-series. International
 Conference on Machine Learning, 2021.

Chen Xu and Yao Xie. Sequential predictive conformal inference for time series. Interna-
 tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2023.

Chen Xu, Hanyang Jiang, and Yao Xie. Conformal prediction for multi-dimensional time
 series by ellipsoidal sets. International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024.

                                            21
                      Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Margaux Zaffran, Olivier Féron, Yannig Goude, Julie Josse, and Aymeric Dieuleveut. Adap-
 tive conformal predictions for time series. International Conference on Machine Learning,
 2022.

S. Zhang, B. Guo, A. Dong, J. He, Z. Xu, and S.X. Chen. Cautionary tales on air-quality
  improvement in Beijing. Proceedings of the Royal Society A, 2017.

Tian Zhou, Ziqing Ma, Qingsong Wen, Xue Wang, Liang Sun, and Rong Jin. Fedformer:
  Frequency enhanced decomposed transformer for long-term series forecasting. Interna-
  tional Conference on Machine Learning, 2022.




                                           22
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Appendix
The appendix contains additional empirical results and is organized as follows:

   • § A: Comments on the nominal coverage guarantee of decomposition-based approaches.

   • § B: Detailed results tables for all considered datasets.

   • § C: Results across varying nominal coverage levels for seasonal CP methods.

   • § D: Ablation study on period recency for seasonal CP methods.

   • § E: Ablation study on feature-based weighting for seasonal CP methods.

   • § F: Qualitative decomposition plots across all datasets.

   • § G: Results on the predictive performance of employed regression models and hyper-
     parameter settings.


Appendix A. Coverage guarantee for the recomposed prediction interval.
Consider the time series decomposition from Eq. 1 and the recomposed prediction interval
obtained by applying Eq. 4. Assume that the conformal methods applied to each component
(trend T , seasonality S and remainder R) provide finite-sample, nominal coverage at target
level 1 − α, which we select to be identical for all components (αT = αS = αR = α). Then
a lower bound on nominal coverage for the recomposed prediction interval Ĉ(Xn+1 ) can be
obtained by the union bound as

  P(Yn+1 ∈ Ĉ(Xn+1 ))
         = P(Tn+1 ∈ ĈT (Xn+1 ) ∧ Sn+1 ∈ ĈS (Xn+1 ) ∧ Rn+1 ∈ ĈR (Xn+1 ))
                      / ĈT (Xn+1 ) ∨ Sn+1 ∈
         = 1 − P(Tn+1 ∈                     / ĈS (Xn+1 ) ∨ Rn+1 ∈/ ĈR (Xn+1 ))
                                                                                        
         ≥ 1 − P(Tn+1 ∈ / ĈT (Xn+1 )) + P(Sn+1 ∈/ ĈS (Xn+1 )) + P(Rn+1 ∈/ ĈR (Xn+1 ))
                 |       {z          } |           {z         } |          {z          }
                          ≤ αT                     ≤ αS                    ≤ αR
         ≥ 1 − 3 α.
                                                                                         (6)

The given bound is loose and does not guarantee target coverage of 1 − α for Ĉ(Xn+1 ),
an effect that can also be interpreted from a multiple hypothesis testing perspective on the
conformal procedures applied to each component (see, e.g., Bates et al. (2023)). A naive
Bonferroni correction can be achieved by selecting α/3 as target level per component, but
other corrections for the conformal setting have been proposed (Sun and Yu, 2023; Timans
et al., 2023). Since our decomposition approach already produces empirically conservative
coverage levels and consists of a combination of different guarantees, we do not evaluate
such corrections here.

                                             23
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Appendix B. Detailed results tables.
We present detailed results tables for our considered methods both on synthetic and real-
world experiments. In particular, we report results for a wide range of possible combinations
of considered CP methods across decomposition components. That is, we consider combina-
tions of the options {EnbPI, ACI} for the trend T , {EnbPI, ACI, BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal,
ExpLocal} for the season S, and {EnbPI, ACI, CV+} for the remainder R. Results are
structured by dataset in individual tables. We additionally provide brief dataset descrip-
tions. Overall best results are underlined, while best decomposition results are boldened.

B.1. Synthetic data.


      Conformal algorithm              Linear Reg.         MLP           Gradient Boost.
  Trend    Season    Remainder        PICP PIAW         PICP PIAW        PICP    PIAW
          Original (EnbPI)            0.889    41.694   0.887   41.626    0.897    11.922
           Original (ACI)             0.898    42.065   0.898   42.168     0.9     11.991
          Original (CV+)              0.879    41.645   0.917   42.41     0.904    12.031
 EnbPI       EnbPI           EnbPI    0.985   44.013    0.985   44.197   0.987     12.536
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        EnbPI    0.944   29.764    0.946   29.768   0.948     9.494
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        EnbPI    0.994   41.332    0.994   41.344    0.99     11.913
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          EnbPI    0.994   44.096    0.993   44.005    0.99     12.481
 EnbPI       EnbPI           CV+      0.985   44.003    0.985   44.201   0.988     12.566
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        CV+      0.946   29.755    0.947   29.771   0.947      9.524
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        CV+      0.994   41.323    0.994   41.347    0.99     11.942
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          CV+      0.994   44.086    0.993   44.009    0.99     12.510
   ACI       ACI             ACI      0.985   43.995    0.986   44.237    0.994    554.298
   ACI    BinaryPoint        ACI      0.946   29.793    0.946   29.822    0.969    551.304
   ACI    BinaryLocal        ACI      0.995   41.361    0.995   41.398    0.996    553.722
   ACI     ExpLocal          ACI      0.994   44.125    0.994    44.06    0.996     554.29
   ACI       ACI             CV+      0.984   43.956    0.985   44.186    0.993    554.321
   ACI    BinaryPoint        CV+      0.946   29.755    0.947   29.771    0.968    551.326
   ACI    BinaryLocal        CV+      0.994   41.323    0.994   41.347    0.995    553.744
   ACI     ExpLocal          CV+      0.994   44.086    0.993   44.009    0.995    554.312

                        Table 3: Detailed results for synthetic data.




                                              24
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




B.2. Real-world data: San Diego energy consumption.
This dataset records energy usage in the city of San Diego, collected over a period of five
years. The response consists of hourly energy consumption measurements in Watt hours.
Available time-dependent features include seasonal indicators, public holidays, temperature,
and air conditioning use, among others.

      Conformal algorithm             Linear Reg.            MLP           Gradient Boost.
  Trend    Season    Remainder       PICP    PIAW        PICP  PIAW        PICP    PIAW
          Original (EnbPI)            0.907    222.866   0.865   161.238   0.899    199.334
           Original (ACI)              0.9     218.301    0.9    187.367    0.9     204.007
          Original (CV+)              0.912    227.846   0.898   168.878    0.9     198.872
 EnbPI       EnbPI           EnbPI    0.964    243.005   0.944   161.773   0.966    271.898
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        EnbPI     0.97    232.852   0.961   172.657   0.973    272.751
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        EnbPI    0.968    238.593   0.963   177.651   0.977    281.453
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          EnbPI    0.968    238.113   0.963   176.555   0.977    281.194
 EnbPI       EnbPI           CV+      0.963    245.122   0.956   170.989   0.967    273.554
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        CV+      0.971    234.969   0.972   181.872   0.975    274.407
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        CV+      0.967     240.71   0.974   186.867   0.977    283.108
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          CV+      0.967     240.23   0.974    185.77   0.977    282.849
   ACI       ACI             ACI      0.96    229.425    0.966   190.995   0.968    278.927
   ACI    BinaryPoint        ACI     0.969    228.552    0.969   181.361   0.97     270.637
   ACI    BinaryLocal        ACI     0.967    234.293     0.97   186.355   0.974    279.338
   ACI     ExpLocal          ACI     0.968    233.814     0.97   185.259   0.973     279.07
   ACI       ACI             CV+     0.962    235.855    0.971   191.174   0.972    286.686
   ACI    BinaryPoint        CV+     0.971    234.983    0.971    181.54   0.974    278.396
   ACI    BinaryLocal        CV+     0.967    240.724    0.973   186.534   0.977    287.097
   ACI     ExpLocal          CV+     0.967    240.245    0.973   185.438   0.977    286.838

            Table 4: Detailed results for San Diego energy consumption data.




                                              25
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




B.3. Real-world data: Rossman store sales.
This dataset contains aggregated daily sales from the chain of Rossmann drug stores. The
response consists of average daily sales numbers. Available time-dependent features include
weekday, average number of customers, and whether holiday indicators.

      Conformal algorithm              Linear Reg.               MLP         Gradient Boost.
  Trend    Season    Remainder       PICP    PIAW        PICP      PIAW      PICP    PIAW
          Original (EnbPI)           0.892    1572.343   0.923    1231.569   0.932   5476.084
           Original (ACI)            0.895    1539.925   0.906    1172.582   0.919   4867.123
          Original (CV+)             0.892    1512.231   0.928    1276.386   0.924   5470.683
 EnbPI       EnbPI           EnbPI    1.0     5303.825   0.975    4870.155   0.932   6075.189
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        EnbPI    1.0     6060.792   0.989    6404.697   0.978   8051.558
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        EnbPI    1.0     5441.858   0.984    5553.258   0.973   7547.193
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          EnbPI    1.0     5263.612   0.984     5381.6    0.658   7373.728
 EnbPI       EnbPI           CV+      1.0     5288.406   0.986    5297.233   0.935   6284.836
 EnbPI    BinaryPoint        CV+      1.0     6045.373    1.0     6831.775    0.98   8261.205
 EnbPI    BinaryLocal        CV+      1.0     5426.439   0.996    5980.336   0.968   7756.839
 EnbPI     ExpLocal          CV+      1.0     5248.193   0.996    5808.679   0.976   7583.375
   ACI       ACI             ACI      1.0     5447.39    0.984    4615.531   0.944    6373.45
   ACI    BinaryPoint        ACI      1.0    6015.128    0.993     6313.72   0.977    8003.03
   ACI    BinaryLocal        ACI      1.0    5396.194    0.987    5462.281   0.973   7498.665
   ACI     ExpLocal          ACI      1.0    5217.948    0.974    5290.623   0.966   7325.201
   ACI       ACI             CV+      1.0    5477.696    0.989    5201.327   0.944    6623.43
   ACI    BinaryPoint        CV+      1.0    6045.434     1.0     6899.516   0.98     8253.01
   ACI    BinaryLocal        CV+      1.0     5426.5     0.996    6048.076   0.968   7748.645
   ACI     ExpLocal          CV+      1.0    5248.254    0.996    5876.419   0.968   7575.181

                 Table 5: Detailed results for Rossman store sales data.




                                             26
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




B.4. Real-world data: Beijing air quality.
This dataset consists of hourly readings of air pollutants and meteorological data from the
city of Beijing. The primary response is the concentration of PM2.5 pollutants in the air.
Available time-dependent features include various pollutant concentrations (e.g., SO2, NO2,
CO, O3); air temperature and pressure; or rainfall, wind direction and speed.

      Conformal algorithm             Linear Reg.         MLP           Gradient Boost.
  Trend    Season    Remainder       PICP PIAW         PICP PIAW        PICP    PIAW
          Original (EnbPI)           0.902    42.918   0.892   40.098   0.905    44.889
           Original (ACI)            0.901    43.549   0.901   44.733   0.901    46.435
          Original (CV+)             0.908    44.499   0.915   44.398   0.913    46.909
  EnbPI      EnbPI           EnbPI   0.954   62.721    0.955   64.756   0.951    64.74
  EnbPI   BinaryPoint        EnbPI   0.956   65.643    0.959   68.696   0.952   68.127
  EnbPI   BinaryLocal        EnbPI   0.953   61.345    0.956   64.376   0.948   63.489
  EnbPI    ExpLocal          EnbPI   0.953   60.869    0.956   63.69    0.964   62.882
  EnbPI      EnbPI           CV+     0.956   64.092    0.962   67.586   0.954   66.537
  EnbPI   BinaryPoint        CV+     0.958   67.014    0.963   71.526   0.954   69.924
  EnbPI   BinaryLocal        CV+     0.955   62.716     0.96   67.206   0.951   65.286
  EnbPI    ExpLocal          CV+     0.954    62.24     0.96   66.52    0.950    64.68
   ACI       ACI             ACI     0.958    63.445   0.961   67.267   0.957    74.507
   ACI    BinaryPoint        ACI     0.962    66.195   0.965   70.108    0.96    76.922
   ACI    BinaryLocal        ACI     0.957    61.897   0.961   65.789   0.958    72.284
   ACI     ExpLocal          ACI     0.957    61.421   0.961   65.103   0.976    71.678
   ACI       ACI             CV+     0.958    64.264   0.965   68.233   0.961    74.603
   ACI    BinaryPoint        CV+     0.958    67.014   0.963   71.074   0.956    77.019
   ACI    BinaryLocal        CV+     0.955    62.716    0.96   66.755   0.953    72.381
   ACI     ExpLocal          CV+     0.954    62.24    0.959   66.068   0.953    71.774

                  Table 6: Detailed results for Beijing air quality data.




                                             27
                       Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Appendix C. Results across varying coverage levels.
We validate our results from Table 1 and Table 2 across varying nominal coverage levels
(1 − α) ∈ {0.75, 0.8, 0.85, 0.9, 0.95} in Fig. 7. Once again we consider the linear regressor
with CP methods EnbPI and CV+ for trend and remainder terms, and vary our approaches
for the seasonal term. We continue to observe that overcoverage persists across all coverage
levels and datasets. For synthetic data, our weighting schemes (in particular BinaryPoint)
consistently outperform other methods. For real-world data, methods show similar perfor-
mance across coverage levels, with relatively small deviations. The general trends in terms
of empirical coverage and interval width across nominal coverage levels are in line with
expectations, i.e., higher coverage requirements result in both larger PICP and PIAW.




    Figure 7: Results for varying seasonal CP methods across nominal coverage levels.



                                             28
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Appendix D. Varying the number of selected periods based on recency.


We conduct an ablation study to assess how results are affected by calibration set sizes in
terms of temporal proximity in Fig. 8. That is, for a given seasonal weighting mechanism
(BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal or ExpLocal) we consider only leveraging a subset of the most
recent periods in time, inspired by the recency-based weighting schemes employed in Barber
et al. (2023). We observe that while BinaryPoint experiences generally narrow PIs when
fewer periods are used, its empirical coverage also decreases below the target level of 90%.
In contrast, both BinaryLocal and ExpLocal maintain coverage closer to the desired level
throughout, whilst occasionally displaying more efficient PIs. Overall, the results across
datasets are mixed, but indicate that temporal proximity can indeed play a role in further
reducing interval sizes whilst guaranteeing target coverage. Since slow-moving trend or
seasonality shifts might occur over long periods of time, discarding time-distant observations
can be sensible.




         Figure 8: Ablation on temporal proximity of periods on real-world data.


                                             29
                        Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Appendix E. Seasonal weighting mechanisms based on feature distance.

Related to the approach by Guan (2023), we also consider weighting schemes for the seasonal
component which are data-dependent and based on feature distances. We consider two
approaches which weigh calibration samples proportional to the euclidean feature distance
from the test sample, one with clustering (KNN) and one without (FeatDistPoint). Our
ablation is performed on the air quality dataset, which is well-suited for feature-based
methods due to its large set of natural features (beyond lags).

KNN. For the first approach we employ the k-nearest neighbours algorithm (KNN), com-
puting the feature distances di := ∥Xn+1 − Xi ∥2 ∀i ∈ Dcal and assigning the k-th nearest
neighbours an unnormalized weight of one, while any other calibration samples are dis-
carded. This provides a feature-based binary weighting scheme, similar to BinaryPoint. We
investigate the effect of choosing the neighbourhood size k in Fig. 9, observing a mixed im-
pact on coverage but a reduction in interval size when only about 50% of available samples
(k = 4000) are selected.

FeatDistPoint. Our second approach provides a softer weighting scheme similar to Ex-
pLocal, wherein each calibration sample is assigned a weight inversely proportional to its
distance (i.e., w̃i = 1/di ), ensuring that samples closer to Xn+1 have larger weights in Eq. 2.

We compare our feature-based weighting schemes against EnbPI, ACI, and approaches
based on temporal distance (§ 3.3) in Fig. 10 (we select k = 7000 for KNN for maximal
coverage). Feature-based weights perform similarly well to other approaches, suggesting
that leveraging the feature domain is a viable option. However, this may come at the cost
of potentially more involved computations in its generally higher dimensionality.




Figure 9: The effect of varying the neigh-     Figure 10: Comparison of CP methods for the
bourhood size k for KNN.                       seasonal component on Air Quality data.


                                              30
    Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Appendix F. Qualitative decomposition plots across datasets.
Here, we display qualitative decomposition plots for every dataset: synthetic (Fig. 11),
San Diego energy consumption (Fig. 12), Rossman store sales (Fig. 13) and Beijing air
quality (Fig. 14). Specifically, we overlay an exemplary section of the original time series
(blue) with the conformal prediction intervals produced via our TSD approaches for every
component (trend, season and remainder) as well as for the recomposition (Eq. 4). We
display these plots three times, once for every seasonal weighting scheme (BinaryPoint,
BinaryLocal, ExpLocal; see § 3.3). EnbPI and CV+ are used for the trend and remainder
terms, respectively. We add some comments and observations below.
Synthetic data. Similarly to Fig. 3 we observe tight PIs for the seasonal component
using BinaryPoint. Conversely, wider intervals are observed for BinaryLocal and ExpLocal.
The linear regressor correctly predicts zero mean for the N (0, 1) remainder component,
producing a constant interval. The seasonal component clearly dominates the pattern of
the time series, as also visible in the recomposition.
San Diego energy consumption. A somewhat periodic trend is revealed, hinting at
potentially multiple seasonalities of different time lengths, which could be investigated for
example with MSTL (Bandara et al., 2021) (but not the employed STL). For the seasonal
patterns, wider intervals are observed at the extrema, which aim to compensate for the
larger irregularities.
Rossmann store sales. We observe complex trend and seasonal patterns which are
associated with larger errors. The remainder component exhibits significant drops on certain
days due to holidays without sales. As such, the remainder displays substantial volatility.
Since the regressor tends to underpredict in these instances, it results in the generation of
notably wide intervals for this component, contributing to the wide intervals and empirical
overcoverage observed in the recomposition results shown in Table 2.
Beijing air quality. Here, we observe a notable difference between BinaryPoint and the
other methods, BinaryLocal and ExpLocal, where the PIs of the former are characterized
by spikes. It is hard to identify a consistent seasonal pattern, and season and remainder
terms exhibit large similarity, suggesting that improvements on the decomposition quality
can be made.




                                             31
                     Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Figure 11: Time series and conformal prediction intervals per component and for the re-
composition on synthetic data. From left to right: The seasonal component leverages
BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal or ExpLocal.




Figure 12: Time series and conformal prediction intervals per component and for the re-
composition on San Diego energy consumption data. From left to right: The seasonal
component leverages BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal or ExpLocal.


                                          32
   Conformal time series decomposition with component-wise exchangeability




Figure 13: Time series and conformal prediction intervals per component and for the re-
composition on Rossmann store sales data. From left to right: The seasonal component
leverages BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal or ExpLocal.




Figure 14: Time series and conformal prediction intervals per component and for the re-
composition on Beijing air quality data. From left to right: The seasonal component
leverages BinaryPoint, BinaryLocal or ExpLocal.




                                          33
                           Prinzhorn Nijdam van der Linden Timans




Appendix G. Details on regression models.
Predictive performance. We evaluate the three underlying regressors (Linear, MLP
and Gradient Boosting) via the root mean squared error (RMSE), and report values in
Table 7. Overall the trend is generally easy to predict, while the more irregular seasonal
and remainder terms record higher errors. The linear and MLP regressors display similar
results across datasets except on the sales data, where the MLP outperforms the linear
model. Interestingly, this performance gap does not translate into lower PIAW scores when
evaluating CP methods (see § B.1). Gradient boosting outperforms the other regressors on
synthetic data due to its small sequential differences, but performs notably worse on the
sales data, where abrupt changes in sales lead to large differences between time steps.
Parameter settings. We also display hyperparameter settings for employed conformal
algorithms and regression models in Table 8. We do not perform extensive tuning and
employ many default settings. The decay rate parameter λ ∈ (0, 1) for ExpLocal depends
on each dataset since the period length varies across datasets. It is selected such that
weights approach zero for data points that are separated by a full period length.

                                                               CP algo.          Param.                Value
                                                                                 # bootstrap samples   20
  Component    Linear Reg.     MLP       Gradient Boost.                         window length         1
                                                               EnbPI
                                                                                 window overlap        False
                     Synthetic data
                                                                                 seed                  42
  Original        14.903      14.898          3.855
                                                               ACI               γ                     0.01
  Trend             0.0        0.002          0.003
  Seasonal        14.702      14.703          3.129            CV+               k                     20
  Noise            1.001       1.003          1.242                              use region            False
                                                               BinaryPoint
              San Diego energy consumption                                       λ                     1
  Original        63.207      51.818          60.746                             use region            True
                                                               BinaryLocal
  Trend            1.336      3.443           2.552                              λ                     1
  Seasonal        28.252      23.098          34.983                             use region            True
  Noise           38.903      32.755          45.179           ExpLocal
                                                                                 λ                     ∈ (0, 1)
                  Rossmann store sales
                                                               Regressor         Param.                Value
  Original       539.921      359.879        1512.717
                                                               Linear Reg.       –                     –
  Trend           28.003       66.599         41.372
  Seasonal       782.387      465.386         983.724                            hidden layers         (100, 100)
  Noise          897.016      758.889        1204.878                            activation            ReLU
                                                                                 solver                Adam
                   Beijing air quality
                                                               MLP               LR init               0.001
  Original        16.86       17.226          18.296                             LR                    constant
  Trend           0.001       0.877           0.046                              max iter              100
  Seasonal         8.735       8.753           8.994                             early stop            True
  Noise           14.204      14.154          15.001
                                                                                 Mean loss             MSE
                                                               Gradient Boost.   Quantile loss         Pinball
 Table 7: RMSE for various datasets across                                       # estimators          100
 different components and models.
                                                             Table 8: Hyperparameter settings for differ-
                                                             ent conformal algorithms and regressors.




                                                        34
